add description on creating a frontend project with cookieplone an… (#1649)
plone/documentation: docs/install/create-project-cookiecutter-volto.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description": "Create a project with cookiecutter-volto (experimental)"
    "property=og:description": "Create a project with cookiecutter-volto (experimental)"
    "property=og:title": "Create a project with cookiecutter-volto (experimental)"
    "keywords": "Plone, Plone 6, create, project, install, cookiecutter-volto, pnpm"
---

(create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-label)=

> # Create a project with cookiecutter-volto (experimental)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Create a project with `cookiecutter-volto` (experimental)
```

> This chapter describes the usage of the currently experimental {term}`cookiecutter` project [plone/cookiecutter-volto](https://github.com/plone/cookiecutter-volto/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter describes the usage of the currently experimental {term}`cookiecutter` project [`cookiecutter-volto`](https://github.com/plone/cookiecutter-volto/).
```

> The development of this add-on is done in isolation using a new approach using {term}`pnpm` workspaces and latest {term}`mrs-developer` and other Volto core improvements.

Reviewer: It won't be new or latest for long. ;)

```suggestion
The development of this add-on is done in isolation using {term}`pnpm` workspaces, {term}`mrs-developer`, and other Volto core improvements.
```

> In order to get started you will need {term}`pipx`, {term}`Make`, {term}`Node.js` and {term}`Docker` see {ref}`create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-installation-label` section below.

Reviewer: I would move this under Prerequisites below.

```suggestion
```

After that you can run following command to create your project:
```shell
pipx run cookiecutter gh:plone/cookiecutter-volto

> ```

Reviewer: I would remove the lines 18-21. We don't want to maintain commands in two places. I also think it is important to put prerequisites before instructions.

> (create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-installation-label)=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-prerequisites-label)=
```

> ## Installation

Reviewer: Windows does not support Make out of the box, and there is no way that I want to try to support all the ways of installing it other than through WSL.

I added a couple of other not-so obvious pre-requisites, an operating system that we support (no Android, iOS, etc.), Python, and Git.

````suggestion
## Prerequisites

The following items are required to create a project with `cookiecutter-volto`.

```{include} ../volto/contributing/install-operating-system.md
```

-   Python {SUPPORTED_PYTHON_VERSIONS}
-   {term}`pipx`
-   {term}`nvm`
-   {term}`Node.js` LTS 20.x
-   {term}`GNU make`
-   {term}`Docker`
-   {term}`Git`
````

Reviewer: I also think we need to include pnpm. See https://6.docs.plone.org/volto/contributing/developing-core.html#pnpm

(create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-installation-pipx-label)=

### pipx

> Install {term}`pipx`.

Reviewer: We need to have a link to the glossary for each term only once.

```suggestion
Install pipx.
```

```shell
pip install pipx
```

(create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-installation-gnu-make-label)=

### GNU make

```{include} ../volto/contributing/install-make.md
```

> (create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-installation-node.js-label)=

Reviewer: Let's move this to the correct order.

```suggestion
```

> ### Node.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> First you'll need nvm, {term}`Node Version Manager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> #### nvm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### nvm
```

The following terminal session commands use `bash` for the shell.
Adapt them for your flavor of shell.

```{seealso}
See the [`nvm` install and update script documentation](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm#install--update-script).
For the `fish` shell, see [`nvm.fish`](https://github.com/jorgebucaran/nvm.fish).
```

1.  Create your shell profile, if it does not exist.

    ```shell
    touch ~/.bash_profile
    ```

2.  Download and run the `nvm` install and update script, and pipe it into `bash`.

    ```shell
    curl -o- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/creationix/nvm/v{NVM_VERSION}/install.sh | bash
    ```

3.  Source your profile.
    Alternatively close the session and open a new one.

    ```shell
    source ~/.bash_profile
    ```

4.  Verify that the `nvm` version is that which you just installed or updated:

    ```shell
    nvm --version

>     ```

Reviewer: Let's convert this entire section to an include file for easier maintenance, and not do copy paste. The include should go into a separate PR in https://github.com/plone/volto, and updated in both this PR and the volto PR in the following places:

- https://6.docs.plone.org/install/create-project.html#nvm
- https://6.docs.plone.org/volto/contributing/developing-core.html#nvm

I should have done that when I did the other includes, but this one may have been under revision.

Author: @stevepiercy added the pull request for plone/volto [here](https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/5968).

Author: @stevepiercy I am now using the nvm installation include file in create-project.html#nvm
create-project-cookiecutter-volto.html#nvm...
I just need to figure out how to update the volto submodule of this fork... and I will add further examples to create-project-cookiecutter-volto.html...

Author: @stevepiercy  the nvm installation include file is now used in create-project.html#nvm and
create-project-cookiecutter-volto.html#nvm...

Reviewer: @animus888 sorry for the delay. We're awaiting revisions to the new cookiecutter that wraps other cookiecutters before pushing out new documentation of any cookiecutter. See https://github.com/plone/cookieplone. @sneridagh, @ericof, and @davisagli started work on that at the Axolote Sprint, and made significant progress, but I'm not sure where it stands.

> #### Finally install Node.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion

(create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-installation-node.js-label)=

### Node.js
```

```{include} ../volto/contributing/install-nodejs.md
```

> 

Reviewer: We need to install Make, unless the cookiecutter does that for the user.

````suggestion

(create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-installation-make-label)=

### Make

```{include} ../volto/contributing/install-make.md
```
````

(create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-installation-docker-label)=

### Docker

{term}`Docker` is needed later to start the plone backend inside a container.

```{include} ../volto/contributing/install-docker.md
```

> (project-add-ons-label)=

Reviewer: ````suggestion

(create-a-project-with-cookiecutter-volto-experimental-create-the-project-label)=

## Create the project

After satisfying the prerequisites, create the project.

```shell
pipx run cookiecutter gh:plone/cookiecutter-volto
```

## Build the frontend and backend

To work on your project, you need to build both the frontend and backend.

```shell
make install
```

(project-add-ons-label)=
````

> # Project Add-Ons

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Project add-ons
```

> After having initially built frontend and backend using the command `make install`,

Reviewer: Where do we tell users to do this? It should be a separate subsection.

Author: There is a separate subsection "Build the frontend and backend" now. Additionally, information on differences between frontend and backend is added to this subsection.

> After having initially built frontend and backend using the command `make install`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> you will have the configuration file {file}`volto.config.js` (and other stuff) inside your top add-on folder:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have a project and built both the frontend and backend, you will have the configuration file {file}`volto.config.js` (and other stuff) inside your top add-on folder:

```

```js
const addons = ['youraddon'];
const theme = '';

module.exports = {
  addons,
  theme,
};
```

> In {file}`volto.config.js` you can add add-ons like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In {file}`volto.config.js`, you can add add-ons like this:

```

```js
const addons = ['youraddon','@kitconcept/volto-light-theme'];
```

> You also have to add it to the `dependencies` section of {file}`packages/youraddon/package.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also have to add it to the `dependencies` section of {file}`packages/<YOUR_ADD_ON>/package.json`:

```

```json
  "dependencies": {
    "@plone/components": "1.7.0",
    "@kitconcept/volto-light-theme" : "^3.2"
  },
```

> If your desired add-on is a theme addon, you should also change following line in {file}`volto.config.js`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your desired add-on is a theme add-on, you should also change the following line in {file}`volto.config.js`:

```

```js
const theme = '@kitconcept/volto-light-theme';
```

> After all that, you have to execute `make install` again in order to install the new add-on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all that, you need to run `make install` again to install the new add-on.
```

(start-frontend-and-backend)=

> # Start frontend and backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Start frontend and backend
```

Now you are ready to run your project.

> You can start frontend and backend in separate terminal sessions in the same project directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must start the frontend and backend in separate terminal sessions from the same working directory, at the root of your project.
```

```shell
make start-backend-docker
```

```shell
pnpm start
```

(change-the-logo-label)=

## Change the Logo

> You can change the logo locally or by overriding Logo component of an installed theme add-on e.g. `kitconcept/volto-light-theme`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change the logo locally, or by overriding the `Logo` component of an installed theme's add-on, for example, `kitconcept/volto-light-theme`.
```

`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} local

> In order to override the Logo component, you will have to add following file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To override the `Logo` component, you will have to add a file {file}`packages/youraddon/src/customizations/components/Logo/Logo.jsx`.
```

> {file}`packages/youraddon/src/customizations/components/Logo/Logo.jsx`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Then you only have to change the line where the logo gets imported to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then change the line where the logo gets imported:

```

```js
import LogoImage from '../../../../../images/Logo.svg';
```

> Assuming you got your Logo ready in an local images folder like {file}`packages/youraddon/src/images/Logo.svg`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This assumes your logo is in a local `images` folder, such as {file}`packages/<YOUR_ADD_ON>/src/images/Logo.svg`.
```

````

````{tab-item} volto-light-theme

> Target Add-On Component: `src/components/Logo/Logo.jsx` of `kitconcept/volto-light-theme`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Target add-on component: `src/components/Logo/Logo.jsx` of `kitconcept/volto-light-theme`
```

Of course, this only works if you have already installed the `kitconcept/volto-light-theme` add-on.

> In order to override the Logo component of the volto-light-theme package, you will have to add following file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To override the `Logo` component of the `volto-light-theme` package, add the file {file}`packages/youraddon/src/customizations/@kitconcept/volto-light-theme/components/Logo/Logo.jsx`.
```

> {file}`packages/youraddon/src/customizations/@kitconcept/volto-light-theme/components/Logo/Logo.jsx`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Then you only have to change the line where the logo gets imported to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then change the line where the logo gets imported:
```

```js
import LogoImage from '../../../../../images/Logo.svg';
```

> Assuming you got your Logo ready in an local images folder like {file}`packages/youraddon/src/images/Logo.svg`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This assumes your logo is in a local `images` folder, such as {file}`packages/<YOUR_ADD_ON>/src/images/Logo.svg`.
```
